###### [home](/index.html) > [construction changes](/constructionchanges.html)
# Sections I Highlighted in my copy of "Design for Manufacturability Handbook"

Handbook on ways to design things so they can be manufactured efficiently. [Amazon link.](https://www.amazon.com/Design-Manufacturability-Handbook-James-Bralla/dp/007007139X)

---

### *On direct labor:*

> **The number of manufacturing operations required to complete a part probably is the greatest single determinant of direct labor cost.** Each operation involves a “pick up and locate” and a “remove and set aside” of the material or part, and usually additional inspection by the operators is necessary. In addition, as the number of operations increases, indirect costs tend to accelerate. The chances for cumulative dimensional error are increased owing to changing locating points and surfaces. More setups are required; scrap and rework increase; timekeeping, counting, and paperwork expand; and shop scheduling becomes more complex.


### *On special tooling:*

> With high production volume, a substantial investment in tools normally can be readily justified by the reduction in direct labor unit cost, since the total tooling cost amortized over many units of product results in a low tooling cost per unit. For low-volume-production applications, even moderate tooling costs can contribute relatively high unit tooling costs.

### *On Basic Principles of Designing for Economical Production:*

> The following principles, applicable to virtually all manufacturing processes, will aid designers in specifying components and products that can be manufactured at minimum cost.
> > 1. **Simplicity.** Other factors being equal, the product with the fewest parts, the least intricate shape, the fewest precision adjustments, and the shortest manufacturing sequence will be the least costly to produce. Additionally, it usually will be the most reliable and the easiest to service.> 2. **Standard materials and components.** Use of widely available materials and off- the-shelf parts enables the benefits of mass production to be realized by even low-unit- quantity products. Use of such standard components also simplifies inventory management, eases purchasing, avoids tooling and equipment  investments, and speeds the manufacturing cycle.> 3. **Standardized design of the product itself.** When several similar products are to be produced, specify the same materials, parts, and subassemblies for each as much as possible. This procedure will provide economies of scale for component production, simplify process control and operator training, and reduce the investment required for tooling and equipment.> 4. **Liberal tolerances.** Although the extra cost of producing too tight tolerances has been well documented, this fact is often not appreciated well enough by product designers. The higher costs of tight tolerances stem from factors such as:
  1. extra operations such as grinding, honing, or lapping after primary machining operations 
  2. higher tooling costs from the greater precision needed initially when the tools are made and the more frequent and more careful maintenance needed as they wear
  3. longer operating cycles
  4. higher scrap and rework costs
  5. the need for more skilled and highly trained workers
  6. higher materials costs
  7. more sizable investments for precision equipment.> 5. **Use of the most processible materials.** Use the most processible materials available as long as their functional characteristics and cost are suitable. There are often significant differences in processibility (cycle time, optimal cutting speed, flowability, etc.) between conventional material grades and those developed for easy processibility. However, in the long run, the most economical material is the one with the lowest combined cost of materials, processing, and warranty and service charges over the designed life of the product.> 6. **Teamwork with manufacturing personnel.** The most producible designs are provided when the designer and manufacturing personnel, particularly manufacturing engineers, work closely together as a team or otherwise collaborate from the outset.

> 7. **Avoidance of secondary operations.** Consider the cost of operations, and design in order to eliminate or simplify them whenever possible. Such operations as deburring, inspection, plating and painting, heat treating, material handling, and others may prove to be as expensive as the primary manufacturing operation and should be considered as the design is developed. For example, firm, nonambiguous gauging points should be provided; shapes that require special protective trays for handling should be avoided.> 8. **Design appropriate to the expected level of production.** The design should be suit- able for a production method that is economical for the quantity forecast. For example, a product should not be designed to utilize a thin-walled die casting if anticipated produc- tion quantities are so low that the cost of the die cannot be amortized. Conversely, it also may be incorrect to specify a sand-mold aluminum casting for a mass-produced part because this may fail to take advantage of the labor and materials savings possible with die castings.> 9. **Utilizing special process characteristics.** Wise designers will learn the special capabilities of the manufacturing processes that are applicable to their products and take advantage of them. For example, they will know that injection-molded plastic parts can have color and surface texture incorporated in them as they come from the mold, that some plastics can provide “living hinges,” that powder-metal parts normally have a porous nature that allows lubrication retention and obviates the need for separate bushing inserts, etc. Utilizing these special capabilities can eliminate many operations and the need for separate, costly components.> 10. **Avoiding process restrictiveness.** On parts drawings, specify only the final characteristics needed; do not specify the process to be used. Allow manufacturing engineers as much latitude as possible in choosing a process that produces the needed dimensions, surface finish, or other characteristics required.

### *General Design Rules:*

> 1. First in importance, simplify the design. Reduce the number of parts required. This can be done most often by combining parts, designing one part so that it performs several functions.
> 2. Design for low-labor-cost operations whenever possible. For example, a punch- press pierced hole can be made more quickly than a hole can be drilled. Drilling, in turn, is quicker than boring. Tumble deburring requires less labor than hand deburring.
> 3. Avoid generalized statements on drawings that may be difficult for manufacturing personnel to interpret. Examples are “Polish this surface....Corners must be square,” “Tool marks are not permitted,” and “Assemblies must exhibit good workmanship.” Notes must be more specific than these.
> 4. Dimensions should be made not from points in space but from specific surfaces or points on the part itself if at all possible. This facilitates fixture and gauge making and helps avoid tooling, gauge, and measurement errors.
> 5. Dimensions should all be from one datum line rather than from a variety of points to simplify tooling and gauging and avoid overlap of tolerances.
> 6. Once functional requirements have been fulfilled, the lighter the part, the lower its cost is apt to be. Designers should strive for minimum weight consistent with strength and stiffness requirements. Along with a reduction in materials costs, there usually will be a reduction in labor and tooling costs when less material is used.
> 7. Whenever possible, design to use general-purpose tooling rather than special tooling (dies, form cutters, etc.). The well-equipped shop often has a large collection of standard tooling that is usable for a variety of parts. Except for the highest levels of production, where the labor and materials savings of special tooling enable their costs to be amortized, designers should become familiar with the general-purpose and standard tool- ing that is available and make use of it.
> 8. Avoid sharp corners; use generous fillets and radii. This is a universal rule applicable to castings and molded, formed, and machined parts. Generously rounded corners provide a number of advantages. There is less stress concentration on the part and on the tool; both will last longer. Material will flow better during manufacture. There may be fewer operational steps. Scrap rates will be reduced.
>  There are some exceptions to this “no sharp corner” rule, however. Two intersecting machined surfaces will leave a sharp external corner, and there is no cost advantage in trying to prevent it. The external corners of a powder-metal part, where surfaces formed by the punch face intersect surfaces formed by the die walls, will be sharp. For other corners, however, generous radii and fillets are greatly preferable.
> 9. Design a part so that as many manufacturing operations as possible can be performed without repositioning it. This reduces handling and the number of operations but,equally important, promotes accuracy, since the needed precision can be built into the tooling and equipment.
> 10. Whenever possible, cast, molded, or powder-metal parts should be designed so that stepped parting lines are avoided. These increase mold and pattern complexity and cost.
> 11. With all casting and molding processes, it is a good idea to design workpieces so that wall thicknesses are as uniform as possible. With high-shrinkage materials (e.g., plastics and aluminum), the need is greater.
> 12. Space holes in machined, cast, molded, or stamped parts so that they can be made in one operation without tooling weakness. Most processes have limitations on the closeness with which holes can be made simultaneously because of the lack of strength of thin die sections, material-flow problems in molds, or the difficulty in putting multiple machining spindles close together.


### *Automatic Equipment - Economic Production Quantities*

> Savings in labor cost are the major advantage of special-purpose and automatic equipment, but there are other advantages as well: reduced work-in-process inventory, reduced tendency of damage to parts during handling, reduced throughput time for production, reduced floor space, and fewer rejects.

### *Computer Control - Other Factors:*

> Computer-controlled and numerically controlled equipment has other advantages for production design in addition to those noted above:
> 1. Lead time for producing new parts is greatly reduced. Designers can see the results of their work sooner, evaluate their designs, and incorporate necessary changes at an early stage.
> > 2. Parts that are not economically produced by conventional methods sometimes arequite straightforward with computer or numerical control. Contoured parts such as cams and turbine blades are examples.
> 3. Computer control can optimize process conditions such as cutting feeds and speeds as the operation progresses.
> > 4. Computer-aided design (CAD) of the product can provide data directly for control of manufacturing processes, bypassing the cost and lead time required for engineering drawings and process programming. Similarly, the process-controlling computer can provide data for the production and managerial control system.
> > 5. Setup and changeover times are greatly reduced. Processing times are also being reduced as high-velocity computer control is being developed.To achieve these advantages, an investment in the necessary equipment is required, and this can be substantial. More vital and even more costly in many cases is the training of personnel capable of developing, debugging, and operating the necessary control programs.

### *Leading a project being designed and designing for manufacturing (concurrent):*

> To be successful, a concurrent engineering project should be guided by a person having authority, at least within the project, over all team participants. The role of the leader of a DFM or DFX design project is most critical to the project’s success.> 
> In addition to having the leadership and human relations skills needed to direct per- sons with varied skills, backgrounds, and attitudes, the leader must have sound technical judgment in matters of design, manufacturability, and the other key attributes wanted in the product. Much design engineering involves delicate compromises in which conflicting objectives have to be balanced. Knowledge and experience in the various functions involved in the realization and sale of the product are also important. The leader should be results-oriented and should be able to imbue the same attitude in the team. In addition, the leader must have persuasive powers to influence others both inside and outside the team.

###  *Standardization:*

> Standardization has many advantages. 
> 
> - Development costs are eliminated if existing components can be used.  
> 
> - Training costs are reduced because when employees learn a procedure once, it is applicable to other situations. The need for additional training for other products, other locations, or other projects is eliminated. 
> 
> - Mistakes are fewer because employees have developed the knowledge and skills that minimize mistakes. 
> 
> - Startup costs are reduced because of the familiarity of workers, supervisors, and support personnel with the systems already in place. 
> 
> - Quality is higher, lead time is shorter, and productivity is better because debugging has already taken place, at least partially.
>  
> - Tooling costs may be reduced because tools are already available from the manufacture of prior similar parts. 
> 
> - Production quantities are higher, permitting many economies of scale, including the justifiability of investments in automated or otherwise more productive equipment and tooling. 
> 
> - Just-in-time arrangements are easier because suppliers can concentrate more easily on scheduling and stocking the component involved as a result of its larger usage quantity and greater importance.

### *Effective DFM:*

> Effective DFM involves two aspects: (1) an analysis of the complete product in order to simplify its design (reduce the parts count, etc.), and (2) an analysis of each individ- ual part to maximize its manufacturability.It makes sense to perform the overall product analysis first—before individual components are analyzed—for several reasons:
> 1. Design for assembly (DFA) seems to provide a greater potential return—probably due to opportunities to simplify the whole product and eliminate parts—than does analyzing individual component parts.
> > 2. The configuration of the overall assembly, decided on after a DFA analysis, will determine whether certain parts exist and what configuration they must have. It does not make sense to analyze the component parts until their existence and configuration are determined.
> 
> 3. Final assembly is often the major operation in a factory, the one with the most cost for the company. The project, therefore, often will be more effective simply because the highest-cost area is attacked first.>  Once the overall assembly is analyzed and the improved overall design is at least tentatively settled on, the next logical step is to analyze the proposed major component parts next. The design of each and every part in the assembly should be reviewed and simplified as much as possible, roughly in order of its cost or importance to the product.

### *Evaluating Manufacturability:*

> Manufacturing cost is the most complete measure of manufacturability...Direct labor time is a straightforward indicator of manufacturing cost and is usable by itself in a large number of cases.

> ...One simple way to compare the manufacturability of alternative designs of a part is to count the number of process operations that each requires. Other factors being equal, the part with the fewest number of operations will be the simplest to manufacture and the lowest in cost.

### *Design for Assembly - Overview:*

> Very often, the most significant benefits with design for manufacturability (DFM) come from designing for assembly (DFA), simplifying the product so that it has fewer parts and its assembly is easier and faster. One reason for this is the fact that final assembly labor and overhead together may comprise the largest single item of cost in the manufacture of a product, and if this item can be reduced, the benefits are substantial. However, designing for assembly has ramifications far beyond the cost of the assembly operation, itself. A product designed for ease of assembly can provide benefits throughout the company. Service and recycling are facilitated when a product is simplified; one that is easy to assemble in the factory is normally easier to disassemble when maintenance, repair, or disassembly for recycling takes place. Simpler assemblies often can be brought to market sooner because of fewer parts to design, procure, inspect, and stock with less probability that a delay will occur. Products with fewer parts have an opportunity for better quality and reliability, although these attributes are not ensured.> Additional benefits, when the number of parts is reduced, are fewer engineering and production-control documents, lower inventory levels, reduced need for inspection and quality-control documents, fewer setups, less materials handling, and probably, reduced purchasing workload.> From this, it may be seen that the most advantageous sequence of analysis of a product or an assembly is to attack the overall assembly first. Not only does this provide the most benefits but when this is done, it will be known which parts will remain and what their function and general configuration will be. These parts can then be simplified, but we need to know which parts are retained and their general shape before they are analyzed for DFM/DFX improvements.

### *DFA - Economic Production Quantities:*

> There are no economic limits to the lot size for an assembly operation. Quantities can range from one to millions. However, the greater the quantity and the more often the assembly operations are repeated, the easier it is for product designers and manufac- turing engineers to develop design and methods changes that simplify assembly opera- tions even to the point of eliminating them altogether with a one-piece design. (For example, the coat hanger, which probably started as a four- or five-piece wood-and- wire assembly, is now commonly made from a single wire or plastic part.)> Usually, production quantities on the order of millions per year are required before a fully automatic assembly operation with dedicated equipment can be justified. The most common examples are packing operations for low-cost variety store items. These are almost invariably automated to some degree. However, computer-controlled robotic apparatus can assemble automatically when quantities are much lower. From a product design standpoint, if the designer assumes automatic assembly, it does not make a great deal of difference if the assembly is actually automatic or manual. By designing with automatic assembly in mind, the product designer will provide an assembly that is also more suitable for manual methods.### *DFA - Design Considerations:*

> Product designers, when designing parts for assembly, should visualize how the parts are put together. This in itself will help ensure that they consider design alternatives that facilitate assembly. The designer should understand the assembly method to be used and know what tools, fixtures, and gauges will be used during assembly.Designers should look on the assembly or subassembly as a means to reduce the cost of production. An assembly should be used when the desired results and cost (including tooling investment) can be achieved better with a grouping of parts than with a more complex individual part. Each component of assembly should be designed to reduce the number of manufacturing and assembly operations to a minimum.
> **The best assembly is usually the one that has the fewest parts and the least costly type of fastening** (consistent, of course, with the functional requirements of the product). In the long run, the lowest-cost assembly is the one that minimizes the total costs for parts, assembly labor, finishing, tool amortization, and product service and warranties.> Most of the design suggestions that follow are applicable to assemblies fastened by the purely mechanical methods mentioned above and to those welded, soldered, brazed, and bonded as well.

> **Reducing the number of parts is the prime approach in the improvement of an assembly, far overshadowing in impact any other changes in design that improve manufacturability and further other important design objectives.**There are a number of design approaches that lead to a reduction in the number of component parts in an assembly. The important principles are as follows:> 1. Combine parts. Integrate the functions of several parts into one. For example:>   - Incorporate hinges. Hinges can be incorporated in many plastics parts if the plastic material is flexible and the wall section is thin. This eliminates the need for a two- or three-part hinge and the fasteners required to attach it to two other parts. Many storage containers for consumer products are made with integral hinges. Both injection molding and thermoforming permit this design approach. Figure 7.1.1 illustrates a typical example, a container for a spare key, whose lidis held with a “living hinge” of the same material as the container and lid.b. Use integral springs. Springs can be incorporated in metal and plastic parts and sometimes those made of other materials such as fiber. The result is a sim- pler, faster assembly. Separate springs are often troublesome from a handling standpoint because they can tangle easily and because their flexibility makes them difficult to handle and insert in the assembly. The integral spring, there- fore, provides very significant assembly advantages. Figure 7.1.2 illustrates the principle.
>>   - Use snap fits. Replace screw-type and other separate fasteners with integral snap-fit elements, tabs, or catches. An example is shown in Fig. 7.1.3. It illus- trates the kind of element which, when incorporated in a plastic or sheet metal part, snaps into place in an undercut in the mating part to hold the two together. Figure 7.1.39 shows a number of snap-fit assemblies of metal parts.>>  - Incorporate guides, bearings, covers, etc. With some manufacturing processes, these elements can be incorporated in the basic part with a tremendous reduction in the number of components. Many plastic materials have natural lubricity that makes them quite suitable for applications involving bearing surfaces, particular- ly if the velocity and pressure involved are low. For more demanding applica- tions where bearings, slides, cranks, etc., are needed, powder-metal parts can be made with sufficient precision for these functions. They also can be made with porosity so that lubricating oil is retained in the part itself.>  - Put electrical and electronic components in one location, and consolidate components as much as possible. For example, one combination printed circuit board is preferable to several in separate locations; a light switch and ventilation switch on the same mounting plate is preferable to locating them separately, each with its own mounting hardware.

> Some processes allow very complex parts that result when separate parts are com- bined into one. Injection molding, die casting, and investment casting are examples. With these processes, a complex part, as would result from the combination of several simpler parts, primarily requires only a more complex mold or die. The extra complex- ity adds only marginally to the cost of the part made by the tooling.Some other specific guidelines for combining parts are the following:1. Use bent tabs or crimped sections instead of separate fasteners to hold several parts together. (See Fig. 7.1.4.)2. Use combined fasteners, i.e., those with integral washers.3. Instead of using nuts or threaded holes in mating parts, use self-tapping screws. This eliminates costly machining operations otherwise needed to provide a preci- sion hole with internal screw threads.4. Use cast or molded-in identification instead of attached labels. Such identification is more reliable because it is more permanent. It completely eliminates the costs involved in purchasing, stocking, and affixing a separate label.5. Use integral locators, hooks, or lips to replace some of the fasteners holding one part to another. (See Fig. 7.1.5 for an example.)6. Press fits, integral tabs, or rivets sometimes can be used to replace threaded or other fasteners that may be more complex. Press fits with flexible or grooved com- ponents are normally less expensive and as effective as precision-machined parts.Use the following guideline questions to evaluate the feasibility of combining parts:1. When the product is being used, does the part move with respect to mating parts?2. Must adjacent parts be made of different materials?3. If parts were combined, would assembly of other parts or field service be made more difficult or unfeasible?If the answer to any of the preceding questions is “Yes,” then it is probably not feasible to eliminate the part, but if the answer to all is “No,” the part is a good candidate to be combined with others.

###### *last updated: 03/17/19*